well let's take a closer look at the
alifa hospital so Palestinians call it
the house of healing it's gaza's largest
and most Advanced Health Care Facility
Israel claims it's hamas's main command
center but doctors and international
health workers have all strongly
disputed the allegations it has
specialized surgical Internal Medicine
Obstetrics and Gynecology facilities the
hospital has a capacity of 700 patients
but since the War Began more than 5,000
patients have been receiving care tens
of thousands of displaced Palestinian
civilians have been Sheltering there and
even before Israel's assault on alifa
doctors warned of a health disaster
because of a lack of supplies let's
speak to do Dr Alice Rothchild who's a
physician and a member of Jewish voice
for Peace's Health advisory Council
she's the author of condition critical
life and death in Israel and Palestine
joining us from Seattle thanks for your
time with us on Al jazer you're someone
who knows Gaza well you were there as
recently as is August I mean the Health
Care system was already strained under
16 years of s Siege and a number of Wars
just tell us what your initial thoughts
are right now on the situation that's
unfolding well as a a member of the
health advisory Council of Jewish voice
for peace we've been putting out uh an
urgent update every 3 to four days uh
documenting the realities on the ground
from multiple sources so this is a
horrific catastrophe a violation of
international law an appallingly immoral
uh acts being committed over and over
again and so it's it's a rolling
catastrophe that we see basically live
streamed um this the collapse of shiffa
hospital as well as three other
hospitals in Gaza City was predictable
uh if you take uh a Health Care System
that's already on life support and then
you add a horrific bombing campaign um
it's going to destroy the system and
patients are going to die patients are
going to die not only of lack of
electricity and oxygen they've run out
of antibiotics people are going to
starve I mean it is just an appalling
appalling humanitarian catastrophe the
the director of alifa hospital was
speaking to Al jazer a short while ago
and he was saying that at least three
new born babies at the hospital have now
died due to a lack of fuel and we know
many other babies are also at risk
what's at stake do you think for not
only these newborn babies but also other
patients in the hospital if fuel if
water oxygen and medical supplies don't
get in and and don't get in really
soon well you can imagine a modern 21st
century Hospital needs electricity to
power all of its instruments to do
testing uh it just is totally um unable
to function without electricity
operating rooms need to be able to wash
their equipment uh keep the place clean
uh patients need to be hydrated I mean
just basic life supports require the
things that they're not not able to have
and many people don't realize that the
Israelis have not allowed any fuel into
the region since the attack began and
the fuel is used not only to power
ambulances but also to power the
emergency electrical generators so uh it
has a double catastrophe if there is no
fuel and think about the hospital
Personnel the staff is exhausted they're
traumatized many of them are getting
sick because there are contagious
diseases that are now running rampant um
there's no way that a modern hospital
can function under these circumstances
and what's going to happen is that
people are going to suffer and they're
going to die and some of them are going
to die slowly with uh sepsis and
infection and ganging and all sorts of
horrific preventable diseases and some
of them are going to die suddenly when
their respirator stops working so
there's nothing uh positive that one can
say about the situation and of course
we're hearing as well there are about
1.6 million displaced people now in in
Gaza forced to move forced to live in
crowded small places what are the risks
of diseases
here well first of all uh this is a
heavily traumatized population just the
task of moving from the north to the
South while people are being shelled by
Israeli military uh you know they
weren't allowing Vehicles so elderly
people children uh are walking miles to
get to quote a safe Zone and then they
get bombed in their safe zones when
they're all crowded together in on
shelters in mosques in churches in
family homes where there are 30 40
people crowded in an apartment uh not
only are they at risk for dehydration
and hunger uh they are also at risk for
infectious disease so we're seeing an
increase in chickenpox scabies you know
respiratory disease diarrheal diseases
you've got to remember that there's no
clean water so all of the diseases that
go along with a sanitation system that's
not working are going to Peak and people
are even talking about an outbreak of
chalera I mean the sanitation system is
not longer working so there's uh sewage
being poured into the Mediterranean Sea
where people are resorting to bathing
and cleaning their clothes and sometimes
drinking this very contaminated water so
this is uh going to be uh um a
catastrophe from the Infectious Disease
point of view from the trauma point of
view and then you have thousands of
women who are pregnant who are not
having prenatal care who are going into
labor in rubble in crowded apartments
aren't able to get to hospitals aren't
able to call an ambulance uh the
internet keeps going down and this is
controlled by the Israelis as well as
they're damaging uh the internet
equipment people can't use their phones
because they have no electricity you
know em people going to have heart
attacks they can't get anywhere this is
what's this is happening right now and
over the past uh uh 36 37 days or so the
who has recorded at least 137 attacks on
Healthcare in Gaza I mean International
humanitarian law is clear because it
lends hospitals special protections
during war and if they were to be
attacked then there must be plenty of
warning to allow for the evacuation of
patients as well as medical workers
you've been in the humanitarian field
for a long time have you ever
experienced or seen a situation like
this and what needs to be done to stop
this well this is the worst I've ever
seen and I wanted just to address the
issue of warnings if you say to a
hospital you need to evacuate and they
have no fuel they have no electricity
the roads are bombed where are they
going to evacuate to if they are the
major Hospital facility for the Gaza
Strip warnings are not enough uh for
populations to evacuate it has to be
possible for them to evacuate right and
what we're hearing in fact from an shifa
hospital is that when people tried to
evacuate they were targeted and they
were shot
at exactly exactly so warnings uh that's
like a false statement if if Israeli say
well we gave them warning but if it's
not a warning that can be utilized and
there's no place for them to go uh
there's no place to transfer patients to
there's no ambulances that can run I
mean then warnings are empty promises
and you're still you're not allowed to
bomb hospitals that's against
international law you're not allowed to
kill Health Care Personnel that's
against international law the Geneva
conventions uh this is just um not
allowed at all so the first thing we
need absolutely is a ceasefire
immediately and then there needs to be a
massive humanitarian effort to deal with
this incredibly traumatized leaguered
poverty stricken population that has
lost all its infrastructure uh you know
the rebuilding is going to be enormous
and I doubt that Israel is going to foot
the bill um and then ultimately we need
to address the root causes people you
you know I do not support uh militant
groups taking hostages and killing
civilians but people who are oppressed
will will will resist their oppression
and Palestinians have been oppressed for
over 75 years and unless those root
causes are addressed we will just see
more and more resistance which is their
right as an oppressed people okay we
thank you so much Dr Alice Rothchild for
speaking to us from Seattle